# https://www.bcoe.org/documents//Universal%20Wellness/LGBTQ%20Resources/Guide-to-Being-an-Ally-to-Transgender-and-Nonbinary-Youth.pdf

1 Welcome! WELCOME! The first step to becoming an ally to transgender and nonbinary people is to learn more; thank you for taking that step with us! It can be tough for transgender and nonbinary people to bear the burden of educating others about their lived experience. That'ÔøΩÔøΩs wh' 'e‚Äôre publishing this guide: to help begin your education on the basics of gender identity and expressio'.'You‚Äôll be able to better support the trans and nonbinary folks in your lives, and help to create a safer, kinder and more accepting world. Our Guide to Being an Ally to Transgender and Nonbinary Youth is an introductory educational resource that covers a wide range of topics and best practices on how to support transgender and nonbinary people. The guide includes: ‚Ä¢ The difference between sex and gender ‚Ä¢ Basics of gender ‚Äî identity, expression, and perception ‚Ä¢ Forms of address that show respect (names, pronouns, honorifics) ‚Ä¢ Helpful tips to increase understanding ‚Ä¢ Common mistakes a'd'what to do if you‚Äôve made one Learning is an ong'i'g experience, so it‚Äôs okay to acknowledge that you might not know some things, even after reading this guide. Part of being a good ally is continuin' 'our education, and we‚Äôre happy to be part of that journey with you. Trans and nonbinary young people in search of support can contact The Trevor Project 24/7 through our TrevorLifeline at 1-866-488-7386, via chat at TheTrevorProject.org/Help, or by texting START to 678-678. About the illustrator: Damian Alexander is a queer, agender cartoonist and storyteller from Boston. His first graphic novel, Other Boys, comes out in 2021 with First Seco'd' 2 Sex and Gender: What‚Äôs The Diff'r'nce? SEX AND GENDER: WHAT‚ÄôS THE DIFFERENCE? Many people confuse sex and gender, or use the two interchangeably. Many wrongly assume that sex defines gender, when in reality gender identity is a living, growing experience that can change over time. It can be tough for transgender and nonbinary people to constantly educat' 'r be subjected to the other‚Äôs curiosity, so one of the best ways to be an ally is to educate yourself on the basics of gender identity and expression, so you can better support others. Gender Identity Sex Sex is the classification of a person as male, female, or intersex. When we are born, doctors usually decide whether female or male will be listed on our birth certificate. This sex assignment at birth 's'typically based solely on one‚Äôs genitals, however sex characteristics also include chromosomes, gonads, and sex hormones. Our sex assigned at birth may or may not'c'rrespond to our gender. Someone‚Äôs sex characteristics are their personal information,'a'd you do not need to know someone‚Äôs sex assigned at birth to be respectful of their gender identity. When someone sha'e' their gender identity with you, it‚Äôs inappropriat' 'o assume or try to deduce that person‚Äôs sex assigned at birth. Rather, believe others when they share their gender identity with you and support them. Gender Gender describes our internal understanding and experien'e'of our own gender identity. Each person‚Äôs experience of their gender identity is unique and personal, and cannot be known simply by looking at a person. Common genders include: ‚Ä¢ Cisgender: people whose gender identity aligns with the sex they were assigned at birth. ‚Ä¢ Transgender: people whose gender identity differs from the sex they were assigned at birth. Many transgender people will transition to align their gender expression with their gender identity, however you do not have to transition in order to be transgender. ‚Ä¢ Nonbinary: people who experience their gender identity and/or gender expression as outside of the male-female gender binary. Many other words for identities outside the traditional categories of man and woman may be used, such as genderfluid, genderqueer, polygender, bigender, demigender, or agender. These identities, while similar, are not necessarily interchangeable or synonymous. ‚Ä¢ Two-Spirit: a term created by First Nations/Native American/Indigenous peoples whose sexual orientation and/or gender/sex exists in ways that challenge colonial constructions of a gender binary. This term should not be appropriated to describe people who are not First Nations/Native American/Indigenous members. 3 Gender Expression GENDER EXPRESSION Gender expression can be a fun, creative, and affirming way to express yourself. You can be an ally to transgender and nonbinary people in your life by refraining from making assumptions about their gender. Be aware of the expectations you project onto others based on their gender, and strive to su'p'rt others an' 'alidate their experiences. You can‚Äôt tell someone‚Äôs gender by looking at them Expression Gender expression describes the way in which we present or express our gender, which can include physical appearance, clothing, hairstyles, and behavior. We have control over some elements of our gender expression, such as behavior, body modification, or ornamentation. 'e'ception Our perceived gender is based on other people‚Äôs evaluation of our bodies, which unlike our gender exp'e'sion, we cannot control. We cannot visually see someone‚Äôs sex when we look at them, but people perceive gender based on a variety of v's'al and social cues, including but not limited to a person‚Äôs gender expression, secondary sex characteristics, and the social role they are playing relative to the expected gender of that role. 4 Names and Pronouns NAMES AND PRONOUNS Respecting the language that youth use to self-identify their gender is not only polite, it can save lives. In a recent study of transgender youth, using chosen names at home, at school, at work, and with friends reduced depressive symptoms, suicidal ideation, and suicidal behavior. Forms of Address that Show Respect Names Some names can seem gendered, and so some transgender and nonbinary people choose a new name, or a variation of their old name, that aligns with their gender. The process of a legal name change can be expensive and complicated, and may not be possible right away for'a'l transgender and nonbinary people. Whether or not a person‚Äôs name has been legally changed, you can be supportive of transgender and nonbinary people in your life by honoring the name that they ask to be referred to. Usage of chosen name resulted in a 29% decrease in suicidal ideation and a 56% decrease in suicidal behavior*'P'onouns Names and pronouns'a'e a common way to communicate one‚Äôs gender. Honoring a person‚Äôs name and pronouns shows respect and acknowledgement of their gender and identity. Here are some examples of pronouns that people use, in order of nominative, objective, possessive determiner, possessive pronoun, and reflexive: ‚Ä¢ She, her, her, hers, and herself ‚Ä¢ He, him, his, his, and himself ‚Ä¢ They, them, their, theirs, and themself ‚Ä¢ Ze/zie, hir, hir, hirs, and hirself ‚Ä¢ Xe, xem, xy','xyrs, and xemself ‚Ä¢ Ve, ver, vis, vis, and verse'f'We canno' 'ssume someone‚Äôs pronouns, in the same way we cannot assume someone‚Äôs name. It‚Äôs always best to confirm with a person what their name and pronouns are. You can do that by asking, or by introducing your own pronouns when you meet a p"r"on, which gives them the opportuni"y"to share theirs. Honorifics An honorific is a ‚Äúrespectful title or form of address.‚Äù The honorific Mr., abbreviated from Mister, is sometimes used for men regardless of marital status or age. Ms. is sometimes used for women regardless of marital status or age, and can be used by women who do not want the associations of either Miss (a young, unmarried woman) or Mrs. (a married woman). Recently, Mx. has become a gender-neutral option to anyone who wants a title that can be used regardless of gender, age, or marital status. If you are using honorifics, for example on an intake form or invitation, confirm with the person you are addressing what honorifics they prefer. *Research Brief: Gender-Affirming Care for Youth <www.thetrevorproject.org/2020/01/29/research-brief-gender-affirming-care-for-youth/> 5 Labels or No Labels? LABELS OR NO LABELS? Your Identity is Yours to Define Why Labels Matter The LGBTQ acronym is just a small sample of the diversity of the youth The Trevor Project serves. According to our 2019 National Survey on LGBTQ Youth Mental Health, youth respondents identified with more than 100 sexual orientations and more than 100 gender identities. Labels can be a liberating way to express yourself and find others who relate to your experiences. With the internet, using more specific labels helps to filter through millio's'of results to'c'nnect and build community with other people who share your identity. It‚Äôs OK if you don‚Äôt understand all the words being used, but avoid invalidatin' 'thers for using labels that are unfamiliar to you. Gender is complicated, and there shou'd'‚Äôt be a limit to the number of words you use to describe your experience of your gender. It‚Äôs OK Not to Label Yourself If your gender is fluid, sometimes it can feel more liberating to not label yourself. For others who are questioning or exploring their gender, going without a label is more comfortable tha' 'ommitting to one right away. Be careful not to tell others how you think they should or shouldn‚Äôt label their g'n'er. Gender is'a'personal experience. There is no right or wrong way to define your gender, and it‚Äôs OK if you don‚Äôt want to label yourself either. 6 Best Practices BEST PRACTICES How You Can Support the Trans and Nonbinary People in Your Life Disclosure After a friend or loved one shares their experiences with their gender, you may want to inform everyone in your group to make sure that everyone knows to use the correct pronouns, or beca's' you are surprised to find out that someone you know is tran'g'nder. Refrain from sharing anyone else‚Äôs story for them. Disclosing a transgender or nonbinary person‚Äôs identity could cause discomfort if they have not come out to others. It could also compromise their safety, as many people or environments can be dangerous for transgender and nonbinary people. Transitioning Transitioning looks different for different people, and there is no right way to express your gender. Some people medically transition, and others do not. This may be related to personal expression, lack of access to gender-affirming healthcare, medical conditions that prevent certain procedures, or other reasons. Transitioning is more complicated than just a surgery, and can take place over a number of years, involving social, medical, and/or legal aspects of transition. Some people decide not to transition at all. Th"s"may"b" for lack of supportive community, risk to personal safety, or other personal reasons. There is no ‚Äúright‚Äù way to express your gender identity or to liv' 'our truth. Under no circumstances should you ask unprompted questions about a transgender or nonbinary person‚Äôs body, genitals, medical history, plans for medical procedures, their previous name, or invasive details about t"e"r l"f" prior to transition. Imagine how you might feel if a stranger asked you such questions! Age There is no ‚Äúright‚Äù age to understand your gender identity. Some people know their gender from a very young age, and supporting them in this has many positive effects on their mental health and well¬≠ being. Other people transition later in life, when they are in an accepting environment to do so and have access to social, medical, or legal resources to support them. Other people explore their gender identity over the course of their entire lives. Binary and Nonbinary Genders Gender is not strictly binary, and while some transgender people are binary in their gender identity and expression, others may express their gender as nonbinary, agender, genderfluid, and many more. Nonbinary people often prefer to identify outside binary categories of gender, whereas binary transgender people usually want to be accepted simply as men or women. 25% of LGBTQ youth identified outside of the gender binary\* \_Research Brief: Diversity of Youth Gender Identity <www.thetrevorproject'o'g/2019/10/29/research-brief-diversity-of-youth-gender-identity/> 7 Best Practices MOVEMENT SPEECH STYLE HAIR Someone‚Äôs appearance is not indicative of how they identify their gender. There are an infinite amount of amazing ways to be a person of any gende'.' Sexuality Transgender and nonbinary people identify with a wide varie"y"of se"u"l"ties. ""st because you know someone‚Äôs gender does not mean you automatically know their sexual orientati"". ‚ÄúPassing‚Äù Ô"Ω"Pa"s"ng‚Äù is a term"u"ed to describe whether or not a person is "e"ce"v"d as a certain gender; for example, ‚Äúpassing as a woman‚Äù or ‚Äúpassin" "s a man.‚Äù For"m"ny transgender people, being able to ‚Äúpass‚Äù as the gender they align with is important for a sense of well-being, and ‚Äúpassing privilege‚Äù can allow one to move safely through environments where being perceived as transgender is a danger. However, the term can "e"consi"e"ed problematic because it impl"e" that "e"ng perceived as cisgender is the ultimate goal for transgender and nonbinary people. The word ‚Äúpassing‚Äù can imply that a person has to ‚Äúconvince‚Äù others of their gender, rather than being able to simply express their true self. Implying that transgender people are lying, trickin','or deceiving other people is wrong and hurtful. Misgendering To misgender someone means to use the wrong name, pronouns, or form of address for a person‚'ô' gender. Whether misgendering happens as an innocent mistake or a malicious attempt to invalidate a person, it is deeply hurtful and can even put a person‚Äôs safety at risk if they are outed as transgender in an environment that is not tolerant. Purposefully misgendering is not OK, and you can be a good ally by standing up for others if you witness someone being harassed for their gender. If you misgender someone by accident, apologize swiftly without making an excessive show out of the mistake or your guilt, which can create even more discomfort for the person who has been misgendered. Show that you care by doing better moving forward. Microaggressions Microaggressions are everyday comments and questions that can be hurtful or stigmatizing to marginalized people and groups. Microaggressions are subtle, and "h" pers'n'committing "h" microaggression may have no idea that their comments are harmful. For example, a common comment that transgender people may hear is, ‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt look trans!‚Äù This is often phrased as a compliment, however it implies that being transgender is a negativ' 'hing, or that all people want to b' 'erceived as cisgender. Since microaggressions are subtle, do your best and listen to any feedback you may receive. If someone‚Äôs feelings are hurt by something you‚Äôve said or done, take the time to understand and to learn from the experienc'.'\*Trevor Support Center: Coming Out <www.thetrevorproject.org/trvr_support_center/coming-out/> 8 Mis'a'es and Saying Sorry MISTAKES AND SAYING SORRY What To Do If You‚Äôve Offended Someone While we rarely intend to hurt others, common 'i'takes such as forgetting a person‚Äô' 'ronouns, using their birth name instead of their chosen name, or misgendering a person can hurt feelings or even put another person‚Äôs safety at risk. In these moments, it‚Äôs 'o'd to have a roadmap for how to make t'i'gs right. We recommend the three simple steps of listening, being accountable, and doing better next time. 1. Listen Unfortunately, it‚Äôs common to avoid listening to those we‚Äôve hurt whether intentional or not, as it inspires'u'comfortable feelings of guilt and shame. Stay in your discomfort and be willing to listen, because this is how we can grow. Seek to understand and empathize w't' the other person‚Äôs lived experience. 2. Be Accountable Take responsibility for your actions, privi'e'es, and experiences that you hold which could contribute to your biases. Don‚Äôt dismiss what the person is sharing with you, justify your behavior, or defend your intentions. It isn‚Äôt helpful to the people who have been hurt, and it shifts t'e'focus away from the people who have been ha'm'd and onto your personal feelings of guilt, shame, or defensiveness. Remember, intention is not impact. The best apology is one that doesn‚Äôt make excuses or invalidate the other person‚Äôs feelings. 3. Commit To Do Better Treat it as a learning experience. The most authentic apology is meaningless if there is no chan'e'or if the behavior is repeated consistently in the future. Show you care by doing better next time. 9 Conclusion & Resources CONCLUSION & RESOURCES Exploring gender can be daunting, but it‚Äôs also an exciting way to learn about yourself and to express yourself to the world. By learning to support transgender and nonbinary people, you can help to create a safer, kinder, more accepting world. TrevorLifeline, TrevorText & TrevorChat www.TheTrevorProje't'org/Help If you or someone you know is feeling hopeless or suicidal, contact The Trevor Project. COMING OUT A Handbook for LGBTQ Young People TrevorSpace Coming Out: A Handbook for The world‚Äôs largest safe space LGBTQ Young People social networking community for LGBTQ youth. TRVR.org/ComingOut www.'r'vorSpace.org PROTECT YOUR SPACE AND WELL-BEING ON INSTAGRAM ILLUSTRATIONS BY ASHLEY LUKASH'V'KY Protect Your Space And Well-being On Instagram TRVR.org/InstagramWellBeing 10 The Trevor Project‚Äôs Guide to Being an Ally to Transgender and Nonbinary People The Trevor Project is the world‚Äôs largest suicide prevention and crisis intervention organization for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and questioning young people. @TheTrevorProject @TrevorProject
